Dr. Williamson first of all we'd like to begin with what you're working on right
now. I'm working on a novel called The Queen of the Legion. There's another
story about the Legion of Space, a series that I started back in the early 30s.
Is it going to be serialized like the others? Well here's hoping the market's
sort of uncertain. Fred Pohl gave me a contract for it a couple of years ago and
I was president of the Science Fiction Writers of America and involved in other
things, and it has taken time to do, but it's finally falling together, and I'm
putting it into my new word processor, and I'm pretty enthusiastic about it now.
The main character is a girl, and at first I was sort of uncertain whether I
could be convincing and presenting a woman's point of view, but I've sort of
fallen in love with Jill by now. I think I know her pretty well and like her,
and I hope the readers do. Have you finished that trilogy with Frederik Pohl,
the one on the Dyson sphere, the three volumes on that? No, I'm sorry to say we
haven't. I finished my part of the second volume some years ago, I think. A year
and a half ago, Judy-Lynn Del Rey gave us a revised contract with a larger
advance. and her idea then was to publish all three proposed volumes in one
thick volume. Fred was going to get it out last March at that time, but that's
the last I've heard about it. He's promoting his work, he's involved in many
projects, and that's always been the history of working with him. He's a great
collaborator, but he takes his time, So I have hope that he'll eventually get
back to it. Have you—recently you've been redoing some of the Humanoid material,
too, correct? Have you finished—is there a novel that's come out of that?
There's a new novel called The Humanoid Touch that I finished well over a year
ago, and it will be published, I think, this summer, in a limited signed edition
from Fantasia Press with a whole Red Hart cover this November. Part of that was
serialized and analog, wasn't it? And it all reprinted or printed in the middle
of it under the title Humanoid Universe. There was a reference in that story or
somewhere to a book called Ten Trillion Wise Machines. What's that? Well, that
was my second title. First I was going to call a novel a humanoid universe, and
Fred didn't like that. And I wanted to call it Ten Trillion Wise Machines, which
is a title I like. but people wanted the name Humanoids in the title. And also,
that's pretty long to go on a book jacket. And J.K. Klein, a science fiction
photographer, is the man who came up with the title Humanoid Tarch, which I
think is appropriate and brief, and has humanoids in it, and I'm very happy with
it. Perhaps you could explain the difference between humanoids and androids and
robots. Well, in my mind the robots
are a mechanical man and the humanoids are a type of robot that is made out of
plastic and steel and operated by remote control by computers and so forth. And
androids, as I used the term in the comitre many years ago, and I think it's
generally used, is a, let's say, a meat machine, a synthetic or artificial human
being made out of flesh and blood. The sort of thing that is possible to produce
these days or in the near future by genetic engineering, I'd say. That is,
androids bleed and human rights drip grease.
it's interesting that you're going back and doing some of the material that you
started, well not started with, but that you've done before the Legion material,
the humanoids and so forth was it 1928 you published, you began publishing in
the first story I was published in the November December 1928 that share of
amazing and I've been a science fiction writer ever since that was that was in
the tradition of merit wasn't it more of a fantasy kind of pretty much at that
time I was infatuated with Merritt I haven't re-read him for many years lest the
spell be gone but the first stories I wrote well were for at least a time sit a
purple color illustrated with two many adjectives later I began to try for more
convincing settings and stronger characters and fewer adjectives. What made you
start writing the ... Well, I grew up on a sand hill farm in the south part of
this county when times were pretty grim and I, well, I wanted to be some sort of
scientist without any direction or means to get a scientific education and And a
few months after Gernsback started the old Amazing, I came across some copies of
it. And I was immediately fascinated with experiments that worked with travel in
time and spaceships to other worlds and all sorts of wonderful things. It's been
an important share of my life ever since. Did you start for the money? Was it
money in love? Well, the money was well almost immaterial. I got $25 for that
first story eventually. And after a couple of years I earned enough writing
science fiction so I didn't have to do anything else. But half the secret was
that I wasn't married and was willing to live economically. So I certainly
didn't do it for the money. After two years in college I was offered a student
assistantship in the chemistry lab. I could have had different careers, chemist
probably, I was more fascinated with science fiction than I was with science by
that time, though I have tried to keep up as best a language can with what's
going on in science. Was the account true that I read in one place where you
didn't know that your story had been accepted until you saw the magazine on the
lengths? That's true. I wrote these stories on an old Remington Biscuit model
typewriter and a purple ribbon and two or three of them came back one of them
was with a mispelled word in the title and the metal man never did come back and
I was over at Canyon Texas walking by a newsstand one day and I saw my metal man
on the cover of Amazing it was quite a thrill what was it What was it like to
you to write for the pulp, say, through the 30s and so forth? Did you feel a
part of something, or did you feel isolated out here? I mean there weren't many
around here who could share your interest. Was there? The science fiction world
has always been a sort of special community, where I suppose we felt we had our
own special handle on science in the future and in the shape of things to come.
and though I didn't see other science fiction people very often, I read the
stories and read letters in the magazines and so forth. In those days, before
the paperbacks and before TV and before the comics, my people read a lot more
for entertainment than they do nowadays and there were really three sorts of
magazines. There were the quality magazines like Harper's And those scribblers
and light it for people with brains and slicks printed on coated paper that
would take good advertising for people with money to spend. The poets for people
who had neither brains nor money. but we had a lot of fun in the parts even. We
were looked down upon widely. And eventually, science fiction got recognized as
being not entirely without brains, let's say. And nowadays, there's a little bit
of money in it sometimes. Back then, it wasn't called science fiction, was it?
No. When I started, my first story was printed as scientifiction. and Hugo
Gernsback ran the word science and fiction together. He invented the term
science fiction in 29, I think. At that time, you had to explain what it was. I
used to say it was adventure stories with a science background. Well, wasn't
Gernsback, didn't he want more scientifically-oriented stories? He preached the
gospel that science fiction was sugar-coated science, that was education and he
got a whole panel of experts with degrees that were supposed to vet the science
and science wonder-stories when he started that. But actually, I think that was
a much for him to impress the readers as anything else because he did use true
science in his stories when he could get it, but he also printed a lot of
stories that were pretty wild. I think always in the magazine, the adventure
element was more important than the science. I've only seen a few copies of
those very early pulps. They say the amazing stories. That's a pretty big size.
Well, the size that time is nowadays. Were there other sizes too or types? and
Amazing was that size, and Wonder Stories when Gernsback started that. But they
were also, and they were hardly regular popes, because in the beginning, Amazing
was filled up with reprints of classic science fiction, and the rights were so
low that professional writers didn't write for them. so they wrote news stories
that are mostly written by amateurs such as myself. But the pulp magazines were
published in chains with... well, sometimes quite different magazines that were
mass economists because of the covers all in the same press run and so forth.
and they had a standard smaller size. Astounding came along from Clayton, first
his Astounding Stories of Super Science. It was the pulp size. What was the
rate, or average rate, for stories in those days? Well, Gernsback paid a half a
cent a word or less, which meant whether you'd get $25 for a short story and $75
for a novelette. But Clayton paid $0.02 a word and up, which is one reason maybe
the Clayton magazines went bankrupt in the Great Depression. But that meant that
I could pound up 4,000 words a day for two days and earn $160, which was a
fabulous feat for a farm kid in depression days. That was a pretty good income
back then. It was. It was a lot of money. Did you get much reader response? Did
fans or readers ever? Well, of course I didn't know many people in the locality
who read science fiction, but in those days the backs of the magazines were
filled up with letters and tiny types from readers. That was the principal
reader response. I think the editors favored them because they didn't have to
pay for the letters and they were interesting to us I used to write them myself
as well as reading. It was the beginning of fandom, I suppose.
From what I can gather, reading back on your publishing history and so forth,
through the 30s, late 20s, early 30s, you were mostly writing, I guess I would
call it space opera, the Legion material. I've never objected to space opera. I
still think it's wonderful. and I even think that Star Wars could have been made
out of my legend stories as well as it was from something else. I enjoyed Star
Wars tremendously as a sort of adolescent daydream and well, the pulp readers
were mostly young and as naive as I was and the space opera was a sort of
symbolic escape from all sorts of things. I notice I'm not sure how I would
phrase this a change or a deepening or a more serious aspect to your fiction
that begins in the late 30s would I be right in saying that do you? probably I
was growing up and the readers were growing up that's something that's been
going on in science fiction at least in American science fiction all along I
think you can draw a distinction between let's say European or mainstream
science fiction, on the one hand, which has always been recognized and treated
as literature, a part of American science fiction which was looked down on. But
as the readers of that grew older, some of them started writing, some of them
started editing magazines, most of them outgrew science But some of them didn't.
So there was a continual increase in education, the sophistication, and so forth
in the whole field. Maybe you should call it a Diversification because there's
still a readership for Edgar Rice Burroughs and Robert E Howard and whatever. There
are also people who are former fans who are now academic fans who are teaching
science fiction courses and writing scholarly articles on science fiction to
publish the Paris test and so forth. So essentially the field is just
diversified into all sorts of levels and areas of interest. Did Campbell
influence the way you wrote fiction at all? Don W. Campbell? Yes, I think he
influenced the way nearly everybody wrote science fiction. Because when he
became editor of Amazing, and later changed the name to Analog, he had the best,
highest-payer market in the field. He was, well, let's say science fiction was
serious to him as a way of speculating about science and its impact in the
future of mankind, and so forth. He was tremendously inventive, he was full of
ideas that he shared very freely. And everybody who was writing science fiction
for those years was influenced by Campbell, it seems to me, whether directly or
not. if they weren't trying to write for him and reading his letters, they were
reading such writers as Heinlein and De Camp and Sturgeon and a dozen others
who were Campbell writers. Some people resented Campbell and felt that it was an
effort to write for him. Campbell Hanan used to complain that you couldn't sell him
adult sex. Campbell and I thought so much alike so that I always felt at home with
his magazine and enjoyed working with him. And he gave me occasional very useful
suggestions that I used, and he never did, well, I did my material heavily or
tried to persuade me to say anything I didn't want to say. I believe that
personally he was optimistic about science in the future. But when I wrote such
a pessimistic dystopian thing as The Folded Hangs, well, he published as it was
and ask for more. I was going to ask you about that with folded hands. You sold
that one to Campbell? That was sold to him? He suggested a sequel to it. He was
more fanatic for various things that look sort of crackpot nowadays including
Joseph Ryan in parapsychology. And he suggested if people's hands were folded,
they would use their minds, they would develop psychological powers and perhaps
defeat the humanoids. I felt that the humanoids couldn't be defeated, so that
the ending of my novel was sort of ambiguous. But he published it as I sent it
to him, and the reader seemed to like it well enough. I was interested in what
you wrote in the afterward to one of the recent editions of The Humanoids, the
way your interpretation of it's changed. Like, didn't you used to see yourself,
you said, a romantic and the humanoids were bad, but then you'd altered that?
Well, I think so. That is at one level since the humanoids are machines, the
perfect machine, as I recently stated, the theme, the perfect machine would be
perfectly dreadful because it would take away all human freedom and
responsibility and opportunity for achievement. But as I came to look at the
story more, it seemed to me the essential human conflict in it is the conflict
between the individual and society, and the people in the stories are in a,
let's say, a complex and painful emotional situation because the humanoids are
meant to be good. They're presented as benign. They're trying to assure the
safety and happiness of mankind. And in doing this, they destroy freedom. And I
decided eventually that this reflects my own very early childhood experience
when people were overprotecting me because they loved me for my own good, but
still I couldn't help with deep resentment because they wouldn't let me do so
many things I wanted to do. And I feel, by the way, that the conflict between
the individual society is a basic material of most literature, really, and I
approach it in all sorts of ways. at one level why literature socializes. It
teaches us unselfishness and patriotism and obedience and all sorts of social
virtues. And at another level why it can be critical of the influence of society
on the individual. In Ibsen especially he presents character after character who
is destroyed by the pressures of society or by conceding too much to society. In
that novel, The Humanoids, Ironsmith, it seemed to me, represented society or
conformity and so forth. When I first read the book, I kept thinking he was
going to turn into an evil character, a villain, but you never made him a
villain. He remained, I don't know, a friendly person, a helpful person, but
simply one who was siding with the humanoids. Has your attitude toward him
changed since you've written the book? I think maybe I understand him better.
When I was writing the novel, I don't think I really understood him except that
he was a fascinating enigma. That is, he was a likable guy. He wasn't caught up
in the conflict that my main character was. He got along with the humanoids, and
they befriended him. they befriended him, and it occurred to me later that he's
the example of the person who does conform to society, who accepts its
limitations, and as a result of that, is unable to live a more relaxed and
richer life, in contrast to the person always in conflict with society, who, in
the worst instance, has to destroy himself because nobody can live alone. If you
were to continue with the humanoid, further than you have, the humanoid stories,
would you ultimately have them, man, being happy under their care? Would they
stop conquering the universe? Well, I haven't planned to do that. In fact, I was
reluctant to write any more about them until Fred Kohl offered me a contract I
couldn't refuse. but in this new novel, The Humanoid Touch, where I tried to
work out an alternative that doesn't involve the destruction of the humanoids
but does offer an alternate way of life that is an escape from. I don't know how
readers will react, but the story... I enjoyed writing and I have hopes for it.
Well, when you finished with folded hands in that time period, you must have
gotten some response from readers or editors that it was kind of pessimistic or
dystopian because you wrote The Equalizer, didn't you? It was sort of a counter?
Well, more or less. In fact, with folded hands, the humanoid stories were the
first project that I undertook after I got home from World War II. I was an Air
Force's weather forecaster, in the Southwest Pacific when the bomb went off, and
the atomic bomb cast a dark mushroom cloud over all science fiction, and much
science fiction was, well, suddenly pessimistic about the future, thus this was
the setting in which I wrote For Human Knowledge, and when I started to write
it, I originally felt that they could be somehow conquered or disposed of or
whatever, And then as I worked with them, I realized that logically and
artistically they were invincible. So I gave up in the middle of a ... or before
I got in the middle of a novel, I planned and wrote The Equalizer as an example
of, say that technology is benevolent. that can be used to make a really better
world. Then I came back to the humanoids and replotted it with folded hands. I
would just have one more question on the humanoid books, the humanoid material.
I guess some of the readers, some responses I've read about it have been kind of
confused, or on both sides of the question as to what you meant. My concern
would be, are you optimistic about man and his future and his relation to
machines? Can he control them? Can he survive them? Are they going to destroy
him or in his nature? Well, I think I'm optimistic. I try to be optimistic. I
think that once we have technology, we can't unhave it. We can't put the genie
back in the bottle. we have to accept it and live with it. I think that people
who want to return to the 18th century or to the garden of Eden or whatever are
simply trying to whistle in the dark. And I think the technology can solve
problems if we use it to solve problems. So I'm more optimistic than stories. I
think that to a considerable extent, And a story should have its own independent
theme, more or less independently of what the writer thinks or believes when I'm
trying to write a story, why I like to stop after I have a reasonable start and
look at it and decide what the theme is, and then rearrange it if necessary to
give it the strongest impact that I can.
Do you have any questions in this area David? Not about the humanoids. I have
one backing up a little bit. It seems that many of your stories have anticipated
scientific discoveries such as Dark Star Station anticipated neutron stars. How
did you get the ideas about that? Well it's hard to say except that I've always
been fascinated with science, science is, well you can put it as a sort of
mystery story of what the world is, the universe is, about its origins, and
development, and meaning, with effort going on in a hundred fields of science to
unravel the mystery. And I've always tried to read science magazines and science
books, and keep up with what's happening. And I'm concerned with what the
universe is, and sometimes I have speculations of my own that will later confirm
this.
I notice a number of stories, and in some of your novels, especially in the late
30s, early 40s, where you describe totalitarian kind of societies, like
breakdown. Was that story, I think, with the square deal, if I remember
correctly? and in that area where the humans are struggling to overcome sort of
a totalitarian society. Was that in any way related to the world situation? I
think so. At that time, of course, we were faced with Hitler and a little bit
later with Stalin. And I think there were too many stories at that time that
placed us in a struggle with a totalitarian situation. And, of course, that is
sort of an ultimate statement of the problem of the society versus the
individual, the individual being destroyed, at least his freedom erased by a
totally arbitrary society. If I'm remembering correctly, that story breakdown,
wasn't that the one where Boss Kellen was in control and his son wanted to go to
the stars, right? The research. And the boss said stay on the Earth, forget
that. I took that as very characteristic of your fiction. You have to have a
goal, a challenge. You have to keep wanting to go rather than be structured and
restricted in a society. Kind of something to look forward to, to try for. I
think we all need With goals and promises and escapes and freedom and
realization of possibility, it seems to me that when we're caught in this
paradoxical situation between the needs of the individual and the demands of the
society. We can't live completely alone. We have to have a support and love and
so forth and other people. But if society demands too much, it's destructive. So
there's no final answer to it. It's a matter of a precarious set of compromises
that goes on as long as we live. And some people make compromises more
successfully than others. I did my dissertation on H.G. Wells who I think was a
very successful compromiser with society and lived a very rich and varied life
and enjoyed the love of many gifted women and so on and so forth. In contrast
with a friend of his named Gissing, George Gissing, a man who matched society or
tried to head on and died young and bitter and poor and defeated. Yeah, didn't
you sort of, if I remember one place, you sort of, you didn't say this, but I
got the impression Gissing was the, say, the Forrester type and the Humanoids,
and Wells was more the Ironsmith type? But that fits my own notion. Yeah, yeah.
I don't know if I ever said it. Do you take Wells to be pessimistic about man's
future progress? Well, I did my dissertation on Wells and title Chapter of
Progress. It is a critic of progress and it seems to me that he is there saying
in several ways I would recognize that progress is not all we'd like it to be,
that our universe is hostile or certainly not friendly to progress, and that we
have a barrier in the animal nature of mankind, which he explores in such things
as the island of Dr. Moreau, and then a farther the notion that progress limits
itself. That is, as an evolutionary struggle, and I think Wells was a Darwinian
if you stop struggling you sink back so you never can reach a ultimate peak and
stay there. But on the other hand, Wells must have had hope for something better
because he spent most of his life in a struggle to build a better society, to
educate us and warn us and shape us for a world state and he died, I think, more
or less in bitter and despair but still it seems to be that most of his life was
lived in hope.
I want to ask you a little bit too. It's fascinating to me the way science
fiction caught on and began through the 30s and so forth. Oh, around 1939, if I
remember, people like Asimov and Heinlein and I think it's pronounced Van Vogt,
is that correct? Van Vogt. Van Vogt, okay. They started publishing around that
time. Were you reading these people as they started? They all started in Campbell's
magazine. Astounding, he was, well, I don't know whether you'd say So, Campbell
discovered them, and they discovered him, but it was, let's say, a small group
with a great deal of fellowship or fellow understanding and so forth. It was an
exciting period in which to be alive. In 1940, I spent about a year in Los
Angeles. I spent many Saturday evenings at Bob Heinlein's home on Laurel Canyon,
Hollywood, when we had what we called the Mañana Literary Society. It was not an
organization. It was just a group of friends, but we got together and talked
science fiction. and we were all reading each other's science fiction when it
was published. And the field was a lot closer knit than it is now because
everybody could read all that anybody published. It was a little group and we
were much closer together and, by and large, we were friends. Have you kept up,
you know, personal what? Well, I guess as president AFWA and so forth, or SWA,
SFWA Science in America. That's right, yeah. Well, I still have a lot of old
friendships and make new friends, but we have upwards of 500 members in the
organization. And nearly all of them have published at least a few stories.
And publishers, paperback publishers, send me probably 20 or 30 free books a
month. And most of these I don't have time to read. So, I have old friends that
I try to keep in touch with, keep up with, but it's impossible for anybody to be
as intimately acquainted with all the field as we all were in the 30's and 40's.
but we still have a fellowship, a sort of subculture that draws us together in a
way that doesn't happen to leaders of mystery or Westerns or whatever. And it
seems to me that basically it's a concern with science and technology and the
impact on human beings and technology in the future We have a realization that
the world is changing and a concern about what the future is going to be like.
That the layman, or the mundane, as people call them, try to forget, maybe,
because if they see change at all, they're afraid of it. Yeah, I read that when
you were younger, you were sort of anti-nuclear power, and your position on that
has changed over the years. Well, I'm certainly pro-nuclear power now. I'm not
sure that I was ever strongly against it except that when I heard that the atom
had been split, well, I was sort of dismayed. that I had known that it was
possible, I'd written fiction about it as early as 1930, but I saw that it was
going to make life complicated, and I wish that it hadn't happened in my time.
But now, since we have nuclear power, it seems to me it's the safest and most
necessary development that I can see. You talk about contrasting mining coal and
nuclear power when you mine coal and bring out a lot of uranium and uranium
along with it, when you burn it, when you pollute the atmosphere with a lot more
radiation and has ever escaped from a nuclear plant. You killed people in the
mines and on the railways and so on and so forth, so that not nobody, to the
best of my knowledge, has just been killed in a commercial nuclear accident when
we were developing steam boats under Mississippi when they blew up people every
few days and nobody thought much about it. So it seems to me that we have a sort
of exaggerated fear of nuclear hazards and unwillingness
to open our eyes and balance the realities and we can produce produce and use
nuclear energy nowadays and whatever else we do is going to be more expensive or
more dangerous or delayed or whatever. That is, space power plants, solar power
or whatever offer glittering possibilities for the next century, but they can't
do much for us in the next 10 or 20 or 30 years. Change the subject for just a
minute. How did you start to collaborate with Frederik Pohl? Well, at that
time, Fred was my agent, and I sent him material, and he suggested things that
could be done with it. The first instance was something that I called the
conquest of the abyss. I started out to write a novel about an undersea world,
and I pinned the bedsheet on the wall. I made maps, I did research, I described
the technologies and invented people and culture and the setup. But when I got
about halfway through what was meant to be the novel, it just died. I used up
all my creativity in planning it. When Fred came in, well, we got three undersea
novels about it and the reefs of space came About more the same way though I
said somewhat later I'd written a 400 page draft. There was something called The
Iron Collar Man. It had the reefs of space and all the essential background in
it, but I wasn't happy with it. I never did. I showed it to Fred while we
replotted it and he rewrote it. It was a very successful revision. Speaking of
anticipating science, it took a long time to get that into print, and I was
afraid that people wouldn't start doing organ transplants too soon, but we did.
We did the heart transplanters at least by a few years. Yeah, I read that you're
speaking of the body bank in that one. That was a lot of fun to do, and I had
the body bank in my version, but Fred came up with a lot of delightfully
horrifying variations and possibilities of the body bank. Had you ever run
across that in fiction before, to your knowledge? Was that the first time people
did that? Well, as far as I knew, it was new. The body bank was certainly a new
phrase to me. What you...I'm still curious how... I've never understood how
someone can, say, collaborate on a novel. How does that work in your
relationship? First of all, a collaboration is a pretty intimate relationship.
So like a marriage, it doesn't work unless you have a mutual trust and
preferably both parties should have complimentary abilities so each one can add
something. I've collaborated with several people and always because I felt that
they could do something I couldn't. The first collaboration was with Dr. Miles
J. Brewer, something like 50 years ago we wrote a novel together as well as a
short story and a novel that I just re-read, and in some ways I thought it was
pretty good and I kind of apprenticed myself to Brewer, who was selling to
Amazing a couple of years ahead of me, and when you look at him now he wasn't a
really brilliant writer, but he was competent and serious and took his
techniques seriously, and he knew things that I wanted to learn. I did the
writing and most of the writing, and he helped with the plotting and suggested
revisions and whatever. and with Fred well I respect him, first of all I like
him and then I respect his style, his editorial sense and his craftsmanship
generally.
When I'm working with someone like Fred, I think a writer needs an audience.
That is, communication is a two-way process. You need to know your audience, and
you need to feedback from your audience. And I'm doing a first try for someone
like Fred, since I know him, it gives a kind of automatic focus. It helps
crystallize the point of view. It makes the writing go a lot faster Especially
since I know that he's going to do the final draft. I don't have to worry about
literary polish, the alliterations or avoiding rhyme and words. Whatever I write
down what comes. I trust him to redo it. In other words, in your relationship
with him, you sort of get the ideas in the first draft and he does the revision
and polishing. That's basically it. In that book, that was a trilogy. You
mentioned the reefs of space. That was a trilogy, if I recall, and the third
book was Rogue Star. Right.
One of the ideas that fascinated me in that book, I think it was also in the
second book, Star Child, the concept of a sentient star and combining the
intelligence with the human intelligence. That was an idea that appealed to me
tremendously, and I'm not sure where I got it. Sturgeon wrote a story long ago
called Killdozer! about a sentient thing that seized a bulldozer. And my
original motion for this story was to begin with the creation of a mind that
could, let's say, possess matter, could store intelligence and shifting
electronic spins or whatever. I had a technique. I wanted to tell the story
completely from the viewpoint of the creature that was made in the laboratory
and enlarged itself successively until it became the mind of a star. I did the
first draft of the story that way, but Fred didn't like it, felt it wasn't
successful, and so he had me do some more of material from the viewpoints of the
human characters, and the stories it published has shifting points of view, and
that's one collaboration that I've always a little bit regretted because I felt
that the way I wanted to do it, from the viewpoint of the alien, could have been
done and would have been something more original and difficult, although maybe
harder to do. But it worked out very well as a collaboration, and evidently
there was something less than successful about my first draft, or Fred wouldn't
have wanted to change it. Do you have any questions right now, David? No, I'm
fascinated so far.
Every once in a while, I see portions of your stories, your novels, that are
being serialized in books like Galaxy, or Amazing or Analog and so forth and
there's one I've read partially but I haven't found the rest of it the one on
Black Lantern and Snowfire that was published as was that a novel The Power of
Blackness oh okay it was three five novel that's put together three of them ran
in the magazine of fantasy and science fiction and and I guess one in Galaxy and
one in Amazing one thing I saw I wasn't I wasn't It seemed to me, especially as
a teacher of English, I guess, I look for symbolism in some places, a Black
Lantern seemed to me to represent, say, the third world, the oppressed, the
Africans, the Latin Americans, a black man from the streets. I think so. My
original notion in the story was to write a thought, a sort of thought
experiment to set up a story situation that would be a test of primitivism
versus progress. You know, the theme of primitivism is something that we as
teachers of literature are a delight to discover at William Faulkner or
whatever. What I did in the story was to set up the planet Nggongga, which was
settled many thousand years ago by refugees from a wrecked spaceship or fell
back into savagery on a hard world so they developed a very primitive society,
meanwhile the galactic civilization continued to evolve so that when Nggongga is
rediscovered where we have, let's say an ultimately sophisticated technology in
contrast with more or less ultimate primitivism and Black Rated is presented as
a member of the primitive society in conflict with the other society. At that
time, I was still teaching school, so I did the thing as a series of novelettes,
so it's just a way of getting it written and published. It probably lacks unity,
and I feel myself at the middle section of it that's probably better than the
two concluding sections. Did you mean for one of the characters in that story, I
think his name was Toolsmith, did you mean for him to be the same as Ironsmith,
because he does speak for the computer, the machine, more or less… I wondered,
especially the similarity of name, and the way they thought… He's certainly a
representative of the technological culture. Will Snowfire have any symbolic
value, although that's not quite the word? Well, I wanted a romance, a love
interest, and she appealed to me as a sophisticated, civilized person in contact
with a savage on his way up. And I thought that there would be electricity
between them. The name probably is not too successful.
You didn't mean for black and snow, Black Lantern, Snowfire?
It's maybe two of it.